## Redox status- Anything strongly electronegative (excess of unshielded protons in the nucleus) is an oxidant as it tries to steal electrons from other molecules- Glutathione is essentially a 'sacrifical anode' which donates its electrons to the oxidant
-  Oxidation is simply a term which describes the relative electronegativities of different atoms in combination; because oxygen is the most electronegative atom (except for fluorine which is rare) then it always wins a competion for electrons; so when oxygen combines with another atom - the other atom is oxidised and loses its electrons to the more electronegative oxygen; reduction is the opposite historical term from reducing ores (metal oxide) to pure metals where electrons must be returned to the metal ion and oxygen seperated; the terms oxidation and reduction are historical but essentially describe the gain or loss of electrons to form a bond and may or may not involve oxygen or oxides and moreover electrons do not have to be wholly gained or lost but rather shared more or less unequally.
- In a battery, the anode is the electrode where electrons go up (greek ana = up) and hence is the electrode where oxidation takes place; the cathode is where electrons go down into the cell (greek cata =down) and is the electode where reduction takes place

## Imidazole alpha-stat hypothesis

Biological molecules contain weak acids and weak bases with pKa<4.6 and >9.2 respectively to ensure that they are almost completely ionised. It is important that this status does not change because it would induce changes in the tertiary structure and therefore biological activity of molecules. Moreover, ionisation is responsible for the compartmentalisation of molecules (Davis hypothesis).

Any excess of hydrogen ions or hydroxyl ions will disturb this situation, and therefore ideallythe pH is neutral (pN). However, **pN** which depends on the dissociation constant of water which varies with *temperature*, and with addition or removal of exogenous acid or base. A buffer is most effective when the pH is near its pKa. Imidazole groups on histidine residues act as buffers, and have the unique property that temperature induced changes in their pKa very closely match the change in pN. The pKa of imidazole is called *alpha* and this is called the *Imidazole alpha-stat* hypothesis. Support for this theory is found in experiments on cold blooded animals where intracellular pH has been demonstrated to match pN in a temperature range from 5~31C. In humans, normal intracellular pH is 6.8-7.1 which matches very closely the pN at 37C. It is important to note however that imidazole groups are the dominant buffer only when the HCO3- concentration is similar and constant.

The hydrogen ion concentration when measured by a pH electrode is exquisitely sensitive to temperature so all blood gas machines warm the samples to 37C, and then make a mathematical correction (the Rosenthal correction (pH(corrected) = pH(measured) + 0.015 x (37 - Temp)) to produce the temperature corrected pH. However, it is not the absolute hydrogen ion concentration that is important it is the deviation from pN. Therefore, since we know the pN at 37C, it is best to compare this against the measured pH at 37C and not to use the temperature corrected value (see blood gas analysis).