---
title: Git tips
layout: post
category: blog
excerpt:
tags: [code, git, tips]
image:
  feature:
published: True
---

I have been using Git now for a couple of years, and have struggled to understand what it does. I get the basic concept  (that it keeps a record of the changes I make to my code) but it also sometimes seems to get in the way. I have read [Think like (a) Git](http://think-like-a-git.net/epic.html) and  [The thing about git](http://tomayko.com/writings/the-thing-about-git) in the last couple of days and learned a few really useful things.

In no particular order ...

## Miscellaneous

- the idea that git commits can be 'wasted' - you don't need to keep everything or worry about a commit being perfect. Commit if you feel like it.
- think of branches as save points (via [Think like (a) git](http://think-like-a-git.net/sections/experimenting-with-git/branches-as-savepoints.html))

## Crafting a committ (or not)

- in contrast, you can also 'craft' a commit: this is the idea behind the staging area (or index), and is nicely covered in [The Thing About Git](http://tomayko.com/writings/the-thing-about-git). Here you can almost imagine writing your git commit message before you commit (i.e. I fixed problem X). Then simply add those files (or parts of files -- aka 'hunks'). Adding 'hunks' is the task of ...
- `git add --patch` - this is genius. When you are preparing a commit then you don't need to commit an entire file. Running `git add --patch myfilename.here` allows you to run through the diffs in the file and only stage those parts you wish to. You can also think of this as a bit of a backwards solution to the classic `git commit --ammend` which allows you to add things you forgot to the previous commit.

Git patch options

    y - stage this hunk
    n - do not stage this hunk
    a - stage this and all the remaining hunks in the file
    d - do not stage this hunk nor any of the remaining hunks in the file
    j - leave this hunk undecided, see next undecided hunk
    J - leave this hunk undecided, see next hunk
    k - leave this hunk undecided, see previous undecided hunk
    K - leave this hunk undecided, see previous hunk
    s - split the current hunk into smaller hunks


## Selectively applying changes from one branch to another

Common scenario: work in one branch would be useful in another but you don't want to merge the branches.

If current branch is `this_branch` and the branch with the changes you want to pull is called `that_branch`

To pull across a specific commit:

Git cherry pick will pull just a specific commit, but not necessarily a whole file.

To pull across specific file(s):

    git checkout that_branch path/to/myfile1 path/to/myfile2

An [interactive patch](http://stackoverflow.com/a/22375842/992999) from your current branch.

    git checkout this_branch
    git checkout -p that_branch


References

[via Jason Rudolph](http://jasonrudolph.com/blog/2009/02/25/git-tip-how-to-merge-specific-files-from-another-branch/)
[SO answer](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/449541/how-do-you-merge-selective-files-with-git-merge?rq=1)

## Using Git for writing

- `git diff --word-diff=color` ... wow! A way to inspect word by word changes in the file. Much better suited to using Git when writing. I should write more about this whole topic! In the meantime, also note
  - type `-S` while viewing the diff to wrap wrong lines and make everything more readable (via [someone45 at StackOverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/a/3107807/992999) ... Thanks!).

## Visualising your commits

- a free git visualization tool called [GitX](https://github.com/pieter/gitx/wiki/)
- the command line version of the above is `git log --graph --decorate --oneline`

## Finding and restoring something you deleted

    `git log --diff-filter=D --summary`

then restore it

    `git checkout <deleting_commit>^ -- <file_path>`

(via [kablamo](http://blog.kablamo.org/2013/12/08/git-restore/) and [Charles Bailey](http://stackoverflow.com/a/1113140/992999) on stackoverflow)



Things I still need to get my head around

- cherry picking
- the rebase command

## Rebase

Early notes: imagine a development branch, and a feature branch. While your working on the new feature, you also make (possibly) separate changes to the development branch. You don't want to destroy the feature (it's not done yet), but you want these recent changes on the development branch in your feature. Then rebase. 'Rebasing' refers to moving the point where your feature branch separated from the development branch forward in time. In fact, you move it forward to the 'capture' as many of the recent changes on development as you like.

And if it turns out that there are conflicts between your feature branch and the development branch then you can either manually resolve them or do an 'interactive' rebase.




A re-read of [Think like (a) Git](http://think-like-a-git.net/epic.html) is in order!



